[Doc] Revamp ray core resources doc (#30167)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/ray-core/scheduling/resources.rst

.. _core-resources:

Resources
=========

Ray allows you to seemlessly scale your applications from a laptop to a cluster without code change and Ray resources make it possible.
Ray resources abstract away physical machines and let you express your computation in terms of resources instead of machines,
while the system manages scheduling and autoscaling based on resource requests.

A resource in Ray is a key-value pair where the key denotes a resource name, and the value is a float quantity.

> For convenience, Ray has native support for CPU, GPU, and memory resource types and they are called pre-defined resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For convenience, Ray has native support for CPU, GPU, and memory resource types; CPU, GPU, and memory are called **pre-defined resources**.
```

.. _core-resources:

Resources
=========

Ray allows you to seemlessly scale your applications from a laptop to a cluster without code change and Ray resources make it possible.
Ray resources abstract away physical machines and let you express your computation in terms of resources instead of machines,
while the system manages scheduling and autoscaling based on resource requests.

A resource in Ray is a key-value pair where the key denotes a resource name, and the value is a float quantity.
For convenience, Ray has native support for CPU, GPU, and memory resource types and they are called pre-defined resources.
Besides those, Ray also supports custom resources.

> Logical Resources

Reviewer: (so that it doesn't look like we're introducing a new concept of "Logical Resources" in the section)

          head:
            ...
            resources:
              CPU: 3
              GPU: 4
              special_hardware: 1
              custom_label: 1

.. tabbed:: kuberay

    If you are using :ref:`kuberay <kuberay-index>` to start a Ray cluster, you can set the :ref:`rayStartParams field <rayStartParams>` in the yaml file:

    .. code-block:: yaml

        headGroupSpec:
          rayStartParams:
            num-cpus: "3"
            num-gpus: "4"
            resources: '"{\"special_hardware\": 1, \"custom_label\": 1}"'

.. _resource-requirements:

Specifying Task or Actor Resource Requirements
----------------------------------------------

Ray allows specifying a task or actor's resource requirements (e.g., CPU, GPU, and custom resources).
The task or actor will only run on a node if there are enough required resources
available to execute the task or actor.

By default, Ray tasks use 1 CPU resource and Ray actors use 1 CPU for scheduling and 0 CPU for running
(This means, by default, actors cannot get scheduled on a zero-cpu node, but an infinite number of them can run on any non-zero cpu node.
If resources are specified explicitly, they are required

> for both scheduling and running. It's a confusing default behavior for actors due to historical reasons and it's recommended to always explicitly set ``num_cpus`` for actors to aovid any surprises).

Reviewer: aoivid -> avoid

If you specify num_cpus for the actor,  is it right that it uses 1 CPU for both scheduling and running?
That's probably good to explain.

> for both scheduling and running. It's a confusing default behavior for actors due to historical reasons and it's recommended to always explicitly set ``num_cpus`` for actors to aovid any surprises).

Reviewer: The sentence is accurate but for better public relations, maybe we should drop "confusing" and "historical reasons". Instead we can explain the historical reason. IIUC it's that we want to make sure that by default 0-CPU nodes don't schedule actors?

Author: The reason is that we want new people to be able to run many actors in the Jupiter notebook. When people try Ray, the notebook has very few CPUs and they may create many actors without destroying the old ones.

Author: I'm not sure we want to explain that details here.

Reviewer: Yeah, ok, confusing and historical is appropriate. Seems there's a fundamental issue that wasn't quite thought out.

.. _core-resources:

Resources
=========

Ray allows you to seamlessly scale your applications from a laptop to a cluster without code change.
It is possible because of Ray resources.
Ray resources abstract away physical machines and let you express your computation in terms of resources instead of machines,
while the system manages scheduling and autoscaling based on resource requests.

A resource in Ray is a key-value pair where the key denotes a resource name, and the value is a float quantity.
For convenience, Ray has native support for CPU, GPU, and memory resource types; CPU, GPU and memory are called **pre-defined resources**.
Besides those, Ray also supports :ref:`custom resources <custom-resources>`.

> Ray resources are **logical** and don’t need to have 1-to-1 mapping with physical resources.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we could start with a new sub-section like this to explain the differences more clearly?
### Logical resources and physical resources
- Logical resources: ...
- Physical resources:...

Ray resources are **logical** and don’t need to have 1-to-1 mapping with physical resources....

Author: I gave it a try, lmk if it looks better.

.. _core-resources:

Resources
=========

Ray allows you to seamlessly scale your applications from a laptop to a cluster without code change.

> It is possible because of Ray resources.

Reviewer: Maybe something like
```suggestion
**Ray resources** are key to specifying scalable Ray workloads.
```

> Ray resources abstract away physical machines and let you express your computation in terms of resources instead of machines,

Reviewer: more concise:
```suggestion
Ray resources abstract away physical machines and let you express your computation in terms of resources,
```

while the system manages scheduling and autoscaling based on resource requests.

A resource in Ray is a key-value pair where the key denotes a resource name, and the value is a float quantity.
For convenience, Ray has native support for CPU, GPU, and memory resource types; CPU, GPU and memory are called **pre-defined resources**.
Besides those, Ray also supports :ref:`custom resources <custom-resources>`.

Physical Resources and Logical Resources
----------------------------------------

Physical resources are resources that a machine physically has such as physical CPUs and GPUs
and logical resources are virtual resources defined by a system.

Ray resources are **logical** and don’t need to have 1-to-1 mapping with physical resources.
For example, you can start a Ray head node with 3 GPUs via ``ray start --head --num-gpus=3`` even if it physically has zero.
They are mainly used for admission control during scheduling.

> The resources being logical has several implications:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The fact that resources are logical has several implications:
```

> - Resource requirements of tasks or actors does NOT impose any limits on the actual physical resource usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Resource requirements of tasks or actors do NOT impose any limits on the actual physical resource usage.
```

  For example, Ray doesn't prevent a ``num_cpus=1`` task from launching multiple threads and using multiple physical CPUs.

>   It's your responsibility to make sure your tasks or actors use no more resources than specified via resource requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  It's your responsibility to make sure tasks or actors use no more resources than specified via resource requirements.
```

- Ray doesn't provide CPU isolation for tasks or actors.
  For example, Ray won't reserve a physical CPU excludsively and pin a ``num_cpus=1`` task to it.

>   Ray will let the OS scheduler schedule and run the task instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Ray will let the operating system schedule and run the task instead.
```

>   If needed, you can use OS APIs like ``sched_setaffinity`` to pin a task to a physical CPU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If needed, you can use operating system APIs like ``sched_setaffinity`` to pin a task to a physical CPU.
```

> - Ray does provide :ref:`GPU <gpu-support>` isolation in the form of *visible devices* by automatically setting the ``CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES`` envrionment variable,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Ray does provide :ref:`GPU <gpu-support>` isolation in the form of *visible devices* by automatically setting the ``CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES`` environment variable,
```

>   but it is still up to the task or actor to actually honor it or override it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  which most ML frameworks will respect for purposes of GPU assignment.
```

.. figure:: ../images/physical_resources_vs_logical_resources.svg

>   Physcial resources vs logical resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Physical resources vs logical resources
```

.. _custom-resources:

Custom Resources
----------------

> Besides pre-defined resources, you can also specify custom resources that a Ray node has and request them in your tasks or actors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides pre-defined resources, you can also specify a Ray node's custom resources and request them in your tasks or actors.
```

> Several use cases of custom resources are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some use cases for custom resources:
```

- Your node has special hardware and you can represent it as a custom resource.
  Then your tasks or actors can request the custom resource via ``@ray.remote(resources={"special_hardware": 1})``
  and Ray will schedule the tasks or actors to the node that has the custom resource.
- You can use custom resources as labels to tag nodes and you can achieve label based affinity scheduling.

>   For example, you can do ``ray.remote(resources={"custom_label": 0.001})`` to schedule tasks or actors to nodes with ``custom_label`` custom resource.

Reviewer: If the value is too small, will it get rounded down, or does it always round up?

Author: It's rounded to the closest I think. But if we will disallow it then it doesn't matter any more.

>   In this use case, the actual quantity doesn't matter that much and the convention is to specify a tiny number so that the label resource is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For this use case, the actual quantity doesn't matter, and the convention is to specify a tiny number so that the label resource is
```

  not the limiting factor for parallelism.

Specifying Node Resources
-------------------------

By default, Ray nodes start with pre-defiend resources and the quantities of those resources on each node are set to the physical quantities auto detected by Ray.
For example, if you start a head node with ``ray start --head`` then the quantity of logical CPU resources will be equal to the number of physical CPUs on the machine.

> However you can always override that by manually specifying the quantities of pre-defined resources and also add custom resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, you can always override that by manually specifying the quantities of pre-defined resources and adding custom resources.
```

There are several ways to do that depending on how you start the Ray cluster:

.. tabbed:: ray.init()

    If you are using :ref:`ray.init() <ray-init-ref>` to start a single node Ray cluster, you can do the following to manually specify node resources:

    .. literalinclude:: ../doc_code/resources.py
        :language: python
        :start-after: __specifying_node_resources_start__
        :end-before: __specifying_node_resources_end__

.. tabbed:: ray start

    If you are using :ref:`ray start <ray-start-doc>` to start a Ray node, you can run:

    .. code-block:: shell

        ray start --head --num-cpus=3 --num-gpus=4 --resources='{"special_hardware": 1, "custom_label": 1}'

.. tabbed:: ray up

    If you are using :ref:`ray up <ray-up-doc>` to start a Ray cluster, you can set the :ref:`resources field <cluster-configuration-resources-type>` in the yaml file:

    .. code-block:: yaml

        available_node_types:
          head:
            ...
            resources:
              CPU: 3
              GPU: 4
              special_hardware: 1
              custom_label: 1

> .. tabbed:: kuberay

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. tabbed:: KubeRay
```

>     If you are using :ref:`kuberay <kuberay-index>` to start a Ray cluster, you can set the :ref:`rayStartParams field <rayStartParams>` in the yaml file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If you are using :ref:`KubeRay <kuberay-index>` to start a Ray cluster, you can set the :ref:`rayStartParams field <rayStartParams>` in the yaml file:
```

    .. code-block:: yaml

        headGroupSpec:
          rayStartParams:
            num-cpus: "3"
            num-gpus: "4"
            resources: '"{\"special_hardware\": 1, \"custom_label\": 1}"'

.. _resource-requirements:

Specifying Task or Actor Resource Requirements
----------------------------------------------

Ray allows specifying a task or actor's resource requirements (e.g., CPU, GPU, and custom resources).
The task or actor will only run on a node if there are enough required resources
available to execute the task or actor.

By default, Ray tasks use 1 CPU resource and Ray actors use 1 CPU for scheduling and 0 CPU for running
(This means, by default, actors cannot get scheduled on a zero-cpu node, but an infinite number of them can run on any non-zero cpu node.

> It's a confusing default behavior for actors due to historical reasons and
> it's recommended to always explicitly set ``num_cpus`` for actors to avoid any surprises.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default resource allocation for actors was chosen for historical reasons.
It's recommended to always explicitly set ``num_cpus`` for actors to avoid any surprises.
```

> If resources are specified explicitly, they are required for both scheduling and running.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If resources are specified explicitly, they are required for both scheduling and running.)
```

You can also explicitly specify a task's or actor's resource requirements (for example, one task may require a GPU) instead of using default ones via :ref:`ray.remote() <ray-remote-ref>` and :ref:`.options() <ray-options-ref>`.

.. tabbed:: Python

    .. literalinclude:: ../doc_code/resources.py
        :language: python
        :start-after: __specifying_resource_requirements_start__
        :end-before: __specifying_resource_requirements_end__

.. tabbed:: Java

    .. code-block:: java

        // Specify required resources.
        Ray.task(MyRayApp::myFunction).setResource("CPU", 1.0).setResource("GPU", 0.5).setResource("special_hardware", 1.0).remote();

        Ray.actor(Counter::new).setResource("CPU", 2.0).setResource("GPU", 0.5).remote();

.. tabbed:: C++

    .. code-block:: c++

        // Specify required resources.
        ray::Task(MyFunction).SetResource("CPU", 1.0).SetResource("GPU", 0.5).SetResource("special_hardware", 1.0).Remote();

        ray::Actor(CreateCounter).SetResource("CPU", 2.0).SetResource("GPU", 0.5).Remote();

.. note::

>   Ray supports fractional resource requirements.

Reviewer 3: Should this be a sub-section instead of a note?

  For example, if your task or actor is IO bound and has low CPU usage, you can specify fractional CPU ``num_cpus=0.5`` or even zero CPU ``num_cpus=0``.
  The precision of the fractional resource requirement is 0.0001 so you should avoid specifying a double that's beyond that precision.

.. tip::

  Besides resource requirements, you can also specify an environment for a task or actor to run in,
  which can include Python packages, local files, environment variables, and more---see :ref:`Runtime Environments <runtime-environments>` for details.

> The resource requirements have implications for the Ray's scheduling concurrency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Task and actor resource requirements have implications for the Ray's scheduling concurrency.
```
